DOC-2760-added a new page (#299)
tigergraph/gsql-docs: modules/tutorials/pages/schema-design-guide.adoc

These best practices will help you make informed decisions for better performance and scalability, whether you're working on a new schema or upgrading an existing one.

== Components of a TigerGraph Schema

=== Vertices and Edges

In graph databases, vertices and edges are the building blocks of your schema. They define the structure of your data and how it is queried.

==== Vertices

Vertices represent entities or objects within your graph, such as people, products, companies, or locations.
Think of vertices as nouns, things or concepts that are part of your data model. For example, a "Person" or a "Product" would be modeled as vertices.

The following schema creates a *Person* and a *Product* vertex:
[source.wrap,gsql]
----
CREATE VERTEX Person (PRIMARY_ID id INT, name STRING, age INT)
CREATE VERTEX Product (PRIMARY_ID id INT, name STRING, price FLOAT)
----

==== Edges

Edges, on the other hand, represent relationships between entities.
These relationships are the links that connect one vertex to another. For instance, an edge could represent that a Person "purchased" a Product, or that a Person "works_for" a Company.

> Relationships are often model verbs connecting two nouns (vertices).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edges often model verbs connecting two nouns (vertices).
```

The following schema creates an edge to represent a *purchased* relationship:

[source.wrap,gsql]
----
CREATE EDGE Purchased (FROM Person, TO Product, purchase_date DATE)
----

The below figure shows how a 'Person' vertex is connected to a 'Product' vertex by a 'purchased' edge, representing a transactional relationship.

image::Components-Edges.png[]

[TIP]
====
* Model things or concepts (like people, products, locations) as vertices.
* Model relationships (like "purchased", "works_for", "friend_of") as edges.
====

=== Options for Relationships

==== Choosing Edge Direction

When designing your schema, you must decide whether to use *undirected*, *directed*, or *reversed* edges.
Each type of edge serves a specific purpose depending on how you intend to query and traverse the data.

> *Undirected Edges (Friendship Relationship)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Undirected Edges*
```
Friendship Relation is just an example; it doesn't belong in the heading. The same comment applies to the other edge types.

Use *undirected edges* for *bidirectional relationships*.
In a *friendship relationship*, for example, if *Person A* is friends with *Person B*, then *Person B* is also friends with *Person A*.
This means the relationship works in both directions, and we don’t need to specify a direction for it.

image::Undirected edges.png[]

> The following schema creates an undirected edge for friendship:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following GSQL DDL statement creates an undirected edge for friendship:
```
A "schema" is a full plan.  This is only one statement, so it probably isn't the full plan.
DDL is Data Definition Language. It is a pretty well-known term for databases.

[source.wrap,gsql]
----

> CREATE EDGE Is_Friend_Of (FROM Person, TO Person)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE UNDIRECTED EDGE Is_Friend_Of (FROM Person, TO Person)
```

----

*Directed Edge (Work Relationship)*

*Directed edges* are used for *one-way relationships* where the direction of the relationship matters.
For instance, in a *work relationship*, Person A might work for Company B, but Company B does not work for Person A.
This clearly defines that the relationship flows only from Person A to Company B.

image::Directed Edge.png[]

The following schema creates a directed edge for *work relationship*:

[source.wrap,gsql]
----

> CREATE EDGE Works_For (FROM Person, TO Company)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE DIRECTED EDGE Works_For (FROM Person, TO Company)
```

----

*Reversed Edge (Parent-Child Relationship)*

> A *reversed edge* allows you to define both directions of a relationship.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *reversed edge* allows you to traverse a directed edge in the opposite direction of its semantic flow.
```

For example, in a *parent-child relationship*, we might define the primary edge as *"parent_of"* (Parent → Child).
However, to easily traverse the relationship in the opposite direction (from Child to Parent), we can use a *reversed edge* with a different name, like "child_of" (Child → Parent). This makes it easy to query in either direction.

image::Reversed Edge.png[]

> The following schema creates *reversed edges* for a *parent-child* relationship:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TigerGraph has built-in syntax to define a reserved edge that maintains the same attribute values as its primary edge. The following schema creates a directed edge plus a reserved edge for a *parent-child* relationship:
```

Reviewer: You might want to add a hyperlink to the GSQL Reference Manual, for this example and the other examples, e.g.
xref:gsql-ref:ddl-and-loading:defining-a-graph-schema.adoc#_with_reverse_edge

[source.wrap,gsql]
----
CREATE EDGE Parent_Of (FROM Person, TO Person)

> CREATE EDGE Child_Of (FROM Person, TO Person)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE DIRECTED EDGE Parent_Of (FROM Person, TO Person) WITH REVERSE_EDGE = "Child_Of"
```

----

==== Multiple Relationships Between Two Vertices

For situations where different types of relationships occur between two vertices (e.g., purchases and reviews, or purchases and returns), you can represent each relationship as a discriminated edge.

The figure below shows a 'Person' vertex connected to a 'Product' vertex by two different edges: 'purchased' and 'returned'. Each edge clearly indicates a different type of interaction.

image::Multiple relationship between two vertices.png[]

The following scheme creates discriminated edges to represent different types of *events* (e.g., *purchase and return*):

[source.wrap,gsql]
----
CREATE EDGE Purchase_Event (FROM Person, TO Product, purchase_date DATETIME, quantity INT)
CREATE EDGE Return_Event (FROM Person, TO Product, return_date DATETIME, reason STRING)
----

=== Indexing - Optimizing Searches

> Efficient querying relies on optimizing how the data is indexed. When you design a graph schema, proper indexing plays a key role in speeding up searches.

Reviewer: I recently saw an old DOC ticket that urged us not to promote secondary indexing too heavily, because sometimes the overhead of the index actually slows down overall performance.

==== Vertex Indexes

> Use vertex indexes for attributes that are queried frequently, like user ID or product ID.

Reviewer: You need to explain what you mean by vertex index. Do you mean slide 13 of https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1GzHNCCDWjHeeFwauj5jz6C4yLKKpXmdqVC7AA2w3H74/edit
where Color is represented by a set of vertices instead of as an attribute of Product vertices?
Why not include this figure to help explain what a "vertex index" is.

If this is what you mean, then the reason should not be simply "queried frequently". It should also include "is used frequently for grouping and searching, e.g. you want to filter by all the Blue products.

==== Secondary Indexes

> Use secondary indexes for attributes that require range queries or non-primary attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use secondary indexes when the search behavior justifies having an index and either range queries are needed or a vertex index is not appropriate.
```
Documentation: https://docs.tigergraph.com/gsql-ref/4.2/ddl-and-loading/defining-a-graph-schema#_alter_index

== Optimizing for Your Use Case

=== Attributes - Property or Vertex Type

When defining the properties of entities, you must decide whether to model them as attributes or vertices.

=== Attributes
Attributes are properties that are directly associated with vertices or edges (e.g., product color, transaction date).

=== Vertices
Model properties as vertices when they are frequently queried or need to be linked to multiple other vertices (e.g., color as a vertex for products).

=== Granularity of Edge Types

When deciding how detailed your relationships should be, you have two options: *multiple edge types* or a *single edge type with attributes*.

==== Multiple Edge Types

> If your relationships are highly specific (e.g., "is_friend_of", "is_colleague_of"), use multiple edge types. This is memory-intensive but efficient for specific queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your relationship types are well-defined and not to numerous (e.g., "is_friend_of", "is_colleague_of"), use multiple edge types.
```
I don't think there is a memory problem. It's just hard to manage if there are too many types.

image::Granularity - Multiple Edge Types.png[]

The following schema creates *multiple edge types* for relationships like friend and colleague:

[source.wrap,gsql]
----

> CREATE EDGE Is_Friend_Of (FROM Person, TO Person)
> CREATE EDGE Is_Colleague_Of (FROM Person, TO Person)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE UNDIRECTED EDGE Is_Friend_Of (FROM Person, TO Person)
CREATE UNDIRECTED EDGE Is_Colleague_Of (FROM Person, TO Person)
```

----

==== Single Edge Type with Attributes

Alternatively, you can use one generic edge type (e.g., "is_related_to") and use an attribute to define the relationship (e.g., "friend", "colleague").

image::Granularity - Single  Edge Type.png[]

The following schema uses a *single edge type with an attribute* for relationship type:

[source.wrap,gsql]
----

> CREATE EDGE Is_Related_To (FROM Person, TO Person, relationship_type STRING)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE DIRECTED EDGE Is_Related_To (FROM Person, TO Person, relationship_type STRING)
```

image::Event-Centered Schema.png[]

==== User-Centered Schema

This design focuses on user behavior and interactions, making it ideal for applications like social networks or user analytics.
In a user-centered schema, you would model users and their relationships with products, services, or other users.

For example, in a social network schema, you could model *user interactions* (such as *comments, likes, and shares*) and track user behavior over time.

image::User-Centered Schema.png[]

[TIP]
====
* *Choose an event-centered schema* when your primary focus is on analyzing *events* (like *purchases or transactions*).
* *Choose a user-centered schema* when you want to track *user behavior* and *interactions* across your system.
====

=== Recommendation

Here are some key recommendations for schema design:

* *Edge Types:* Use multiple edge types when specificity is important; for simpler designs, use a single edge type with attributes.

* *Attributes vs. Vertices:* Model frequently queried properties as vertices and use attributes for less critical data.

> * *Events:* For event-based analytics, model events as vertices; use edge attributes for simpler scenarios.

Reviewer: Not sure what point you are trying to make with "use edge attributes for simpler scenarios."
